Title:       DWARF package files (Split DWARF, part 5/5)
Author:      Cary Coutant
Champion:    Cary Coutant
Submit-Date: 2014-04-21
Propid:      140421.1
Type:        Enhancement
Status:      Accepted
Version:     5
Format:      plaintext

Introduction
------------

With the current DWARF format, the debug information is designed
with the expectation that it will be processed by the linker to
produce an output binary with complete debug information, and
with fully-resolved references to locations within the
application. For very large applications, however, this approach
can result in excessively large link times and excessively large
output files. Several vendors have independently developed
proprietary approaches that allow the debug information to remain
in the relocatable object files, so that the linker does not have
to process the debug information or copy it to the output file.
These approaches have all required that additional information be
made available to the debug information consumer, and that the
consumer perform some minimal amount of relocation in order to
interpret the debug info correctly. The additional information
required, in the form of load maps or symbol tables, and the
details of the relocation are not covered by the DWARF
specification, and vary with each vendor's implementation.

For more background information, see the GCC wiki page at:

    http://gcc.gnu.org/wiki/DebugFission

This is the fifth in a series of proposals to extend the DWARF
specification to support the use of unlinked and unrelocated
debug information.

  * The first proposal introduces a mechanism for referring to
    strings indirectly, collecting the string offsets into a new
    section, and introducing a new form code for this purpose.

  * The second proposal introduces a similar indirect mechanism
    for referring to relocatable addresses in the loadable
    segments of the program, collecting all such addresses in a
    single section.

  * The third proposal introduces a mechanism for referring to
    range table entries in the .debug_ranges section with a
    single relocation per compilation unit rather than one for
    each reference.

  * The fourth proposal introduces a mechanism for splitting the
    DWARF debugging information into two sets of sections. One
    set remains in the relocatable object (.o) files, and is
    linked into the final executable; the other set is written to
    a non-relocatable DWARF object (.dwo) file, and remains in
    the build tree as an independent file where the debugger can
    reference it as needed.

  * This fifth proposal introduces a package file format for
    collecting the DWARF object (.dwo) files so that the
    debugging information can be easily saved and transported for
    debugging applications outside of the build tree.


DWARF Package File Format
-------------------------

This proposal describes the file format for DWARF package files,
version 2. (Version 1 was experimental.) A DWARF package file is
an ELF-format file that collects the contents from the separate
DWARF object (.dwo) files produced during the compilation of an
application. DWARF object (.dwo) files are produced when
compiling with GCC's -gsplit-debug option.


Design Goals
------------

The design of the DWARF package (.dwp) file is guided by the
following goals:

1.  It must provide quick and efficient access to individual
    compilation units, keyed by a compilation unit signature,
    which is a 64-bit signature that uniquely identifies a DWARF
    compilation unit. The signature is given by the
    DW_AT_GNU_dwo_id attribute in a skeleton compilation unit in
    the application binary.

2.  Likewise, it must provide quick and efficient access to
    individual type units, keyed by a type signature, which is
    also a 64-bit signature that uniquely identifies the debug
    information for a type definition. The type signature is
    typically obtained from the DW_AT_type attribute in variable
    and subprogram DIEs, and may also come from a skeleton type
    unit in the application binary.

3.  It must allow for the removal of duplicate type units. Each
    .dwo file will contain a set of type units defining types
    that are referenced by that compilation unit. Many such type
    units will appear in more than on .dwo file, and the .dwp
    file should contain only one copy of each.

4.  It must allow for the removal of duplicate strings. Each .dwo
    file will contain a .debug_str.dwo section with all the
    strings referenced by that unit. The .dwp file should contain
    a single combined string table where all duplicate strings
    have been coalesced.

5.  The package format must be re-combinable; that is, it must be
    possible to combine one set of .dwo files into a .dwp file,
    combine another set of .dwo files into another .dwp file,
    then combine the two .dwp files into a new .dwp file that is
    equivalent to one created in one step.


Proposed Changes to the DWARF Specification
-------------------------------------------

Add the following to Chapter 7:

=================================================================
7.3.5 DWARF Package Files

[begin non-normative]
Using split DWARF objects allows the developer to compile, link,
and debug an application quickly with less link-time overhead,
but a more convenient format is needed for saving the debug
information for later debugging of a deployed application. A
DWARF package file can be used to collect the debugging
information from the object (or separate DWARF object) files
produced during the compilation of an application.

The package file is typically placed in the same directory as the
application, and is given the same name with a ".dwp" extension.
[end non-normative]

A DWARF package file file is itself an object file, using the
same object file format, byte order, and size as the
corresponding application binary. It consists only of a file
header, section table, a number of DWARF debug information
sections, and two index sections.

Each DWARF package file contains no more than one of each of the
following sections, copied from a set of object or DWARF object
files, and combined, section by section:

    .debug_info.dwo
    [.debug_types.dwo]
    .debug_abbrev.dwo
    .debug_line.dwo
    .debug_loc.dwo
    .debug_str_offsets.dwo
    .debug_str.dwo
    .debug_macinfo.dwo
    .debug_macro.dwo

The string table section in .debug_str.dwo contains all the
strings referenced from DWARF attributes using the form
DW_FORM_str_index. Any attribute in a compilation unit or a type
unit using this form will refer to an entry in that unit's
contribution to the .debug_str_offsets.dwo section, which in turn
will provide the offset of a string in the .debug_str.dwo
section.

The DWARF package file also contains two index sections that
provide a fast way to locate debug information by compilation
unit signature (DW_AT_dwo_id) for compilation units, or by type
signature for type units:

    .debug_cu_index
    .debug_tu_index


7.3.5.1 The CU Index Section

The .debug_cu_index section is a hashed lookup table that maps a
compilation unit signature to a set of contributions in the
various debug information sections. Each contribution is stored
as an offset within its corresponding section and a size.

Each compilation unit set may contain contributions from the
following sections:

    .debug_info.dwo (required)
    .debug_abbrev.dwo (required)
    .debug_line.dwo
    .debug_loc.dwo
    .debug_str_offsets.dwo
    .debug_macinfo.dwo
    .debug_macro.dwo

(Note that a set should not contain both .debug_macinfo.dwo and
.debug_macro.dwo. The latter is an extension that is intended to
replace the former in a future version of DWARF.)


7.3.5.2 The TU Index Section

The .debug_tu_index section is a hashed lookup table that maps a
type signature to a set of offsets into the various debug
information sections. Each contribution is stored as an offset
within its corresponding section and a size.

Each type unit set may contain contributions from the following
sections:

    .debug_types.dwo [.debug_info.dwo] (required)
    .debug_abbrev.dwo (required)
    .debug_line.dwo
    .debug_str_offsets.dwo


7.3.5.3 Format of the CU and TU Index Sections

Both index sections have the same format, and serve to map a
64-bit signature to a set of contributions to the debug sections.
Each section begins with a header, followed by a hash table of
signatures, a parallel table of indexes, a table of offsets, and
a table of sizes. The index sections will be aligned at 8-byte
boundaries in the file.

The index section header contains four unsigned 32-bit values
(using the byte order of the application binary):

  * The version number of the format of this index (currently 5)
  * L, the number of columns in the table of section offsets
  * N, the number of compilation units or type units in the index
  * M, the number of slots in the hash table

(We assume that N and M will not exceed 2^32.)

The size of the hash table, M, must be 2^k such that:

    2^k > 3 * N / 2

The hash table begins at offset 16 in the section, and consists
of an array of M 64-bit slots. Each slot contains a 64-bit
signature (using the byte order of the application binary).

The parallel table begins immediately after the hash table (at
offset 16 + 8 * M from the beginning of the section), and
consists of an array of M 32-bit slots (using the byte order of
the application binary), corresponding 1-1 with slots in the hash
table. Each entry in the parallel table contains a row index into
the tables of offsets and sizes.

Unused slots in the hash table will have 0 in both the hash table
entry and the parallel table entry. While 0 is a valid hash
value, the row index in a used slot will always be non-zero.

Given a 64-bit compilation unit signature or a type signature S,
an entry in the hash table is located as follows:

1.  Calculate a primary hash H = S & MASK(k), where MASK(k) is a
    mask with the low-order k bits all set to 1.

2.  Calculate a secondary hash H' = (((S >> 32) & MASK(k)) | 1).

3.  If the hash table entry at index H matches the signature, use
    that entry. If the hash table entry at index H is unused (all
    zeroes), terminate the search: the signature is not present
    in the table.

4.  Let H = (H + H') modulo M. Repeat at Step 3.

Because M > N and H' and M are relatively prime, the search is
guaranteed to stop at an unused slot or find the match.

The table of offsets begins immediately following the parallel
table (at offset 16 + 12 * M from the beginning of the section).
The table is a two-dimensional array of 32-bit words (using the
byte order of the application binary), with L columns and N+1
rows, in row-major order. Each row in the array is indexed
starting from 0. The first row provides a key to the columns:
each column in this row provides an identifier for a debug
section, and the offsets in the same column of subsequent rows
refer to that section. The section identifiers are:

  * DW_SECT_INFO (1): .debug_info.dwo
  * DW_SECT_TYPES (2): .debug_types.dwo
  * DW_SECT_ABBREV (3): .debug_abbrev.dwo
  * DW_SECT_LINE (4): .debug_line.dwo
  * DW_SECT_LOC (5): .debug_loc.dwo
  * DW_SECT_STR_OFFSETS (6): .debug_str_offsets.dwo
  * DW_SECT_MACINFO (7): .debug_macinfo.dwo
  * DW_SECT_MACRO (8): .debug_macro.dwo

The offsets provided by the CU and TU index sections are the base
offsets for the contributions made by each CU or TU to the
corresponding section in the package file. Each CU and TU header
contains an abbrev_offset field, used to find the abbreviations
table for that CU or TU within the contribution to the
.debug_abbrev.dwo section for that CU or TU, and should be
interpreted as relative to the base offset given in the index
section. Likewise, offsets into .debug_line.dwo from
DW_AT_stmt_list attributes should be interpreted as relative to
the base offset for .debug_line.dwo, and offsets into other debug
sections obtained from DWARF attributes should also be
interpreted as relative to the corresponding base offset.

The table of sizes begins immediately following the table of
offsets, and provides the sizes of the contributions made by each
CU or TU to the corresponding section in the package file. Like
the table of offsets, it is a two-dimensional array of 32-bit
words, with L columns and N rows, in row-major order. Each row in
the array is indexed starting from 1 (row 0 of the table of
offsets also serves as the key for the table of sizes).
=================================================================

Add the following to Appendix F:

=================================================================
F.3 DWARF Package File Example

[TBD]
=================================================================

Add the following rows to Table G.1 (Section version numbers) in
Appendix G:

=================================================================
Section Name       V2  V3  V4  V5
---------------------------------
.debug_cu_index     x   x   x   5
.debug_tu_index     x   x   x   5
=================================================================

--
Revised 2014-06-16.
Accepted 2014-06-17, Appendix F text to be supplied
